in academic philosophy people primarily
play with concepts that are difficult to
understand
but easy to live with in the realm of
politics we tend to deal with concepts
that are easy to understand
but hard to deal with what i'm going to
talk about in this video
sounds very abstruse and abstract
but it's really a pragmatic fact of life
easy to understand hard to
live with an abstraction
simply contains less information
than the things it is abstracted from a
generalization
is always and by definition
something less real than the things
you're generalizing about the problem we
deal with in politics again and again
is that people want to treat
generalizations
as more real as more important than
the things being generalized about so in
a recent video i talked about
socialism versus capitalism this way and
i opened by saying hey
people think of themselves as a
socialist
as an identity and then they they don't
think about politics in terms of
pragmatic problem solving
like hey we need a we need to build
prisons how are we going to have prisons
that work well
that work well for the prisoners that
work well for society as a whole
in terms of law and order whatever
concept social harmony shall we say
prisons that work well for the parents
and relatives and friends of the
prisoners who want to visit them there
are a lot of
prisons that work well for the employees
of the prison let's not forget
where it's humane and you have positive
well-motivated
employees at the prison who don't hate
their lives who don't regard themselves
as being punished by working in a prison
too right
all kinds of different factors but
there's no corruption no drug dealing
okay we need
well-working prisons and you have people
who think of themselves as socialists
and you absolutely presume that the
answer to this question is socialism and
that the problem is capitalism
meanwhile in the real world if you look
around
most of the worst run prisons on planet
earth
are socialists they're government
prisons and people don't even think of
them that way they don't even proceed in
that way
they will just say oh yeah you know in
brazil the prisons are terrible it
doesn't matter in kentucky
the prisons are terrible in england the
prison canada the present terrible it
doesn't really matter
oh yeah that's a bad prison it's really
terrible oh really
is it owned by coca-cola corporation oh
no it's run by the government
that's socialism right people left-wing
people
i'm i'm left-of-center myself what can i
tell you i
endorsed bernie sanders rather than joe
biden in the last american presidential
election even though i was a very harsh
critic
of bernie sanders and i found all kinds
of things wrong with this program and i
read his book
nevertheless i'm certainly someone who's
left of center right i understand that
mentality i grew up with that mentality
that's why i'm trying to productively
criticize that mentality it's very easy
to presume
that any prison that is for-profit and
capitalist
is going to be exploitative of the
workers
the prisoners the system and it's just
motivated by the love of profit and
filthy lucr
and therefore definitionally such a
prison is worse
than a socialist prison but if you
actually let yourself look around
right if you look at if you learn a
truth from facts
if you work from empirical reality what
you're gonna find it's quite
contradictory and confusing
okay the reality is in some countries
you can find some examples of wonderful
well-run government prisons socialist
prisons
right and you can find the worst prisons
in the world
both in wealthy first world countries
and in poverty stricken third world
countries
are government run our socialist
presence and yes
i followed up my last video by giving a
link to an example in south africa
where there's this example of a prison
it may be the best prison
not just in africa but the best prison
in the whole world
this wonderful prison in south africa
that's run by a private for-profit
company and it's making people
re-examine the whole question of how do
we run
prisons in africa and how do we want to
run prisons in europe and so on
and you can watch this youtube video
they interview the staff
and the staff all seem positively
motivated and happy to come to work and
the prisoners are all happy and they're
all learning a new trade and learning
education
and it's it's safe and it's clean and
it's this optimistic wonderful place you
go wow
this is this really well-run prison and
we
can't reduce this explanation we can't
we cannot explain this
in terms of the category of socialism
versus capitalism
because those are generalizations right
and the generalizations
are less real than the things
they generalize about okay what is a
good university and what is a bad
university
some of the best universities in the
world are socialist or government-run
non-profit entities right
many many of the worst universities in
the world i would
say the vast majority of the worst
university in the world
are socialist government-run non-profit
universities and people don't even think
in these terms and people like myself
people left
we don't let ourselves perceive reality
that way
we think oh that's a bad prison that
prison is corrupt the prison guards are
corrupt
that prison is violent and brutal and
dirty
and depressing
we don't think that's because of
socialism we don't want to put it in
that category right this is kind of
cherry-picking
that goes on and likewise the
universities oh yeah we know some
some high schools are bad and some
universities are bad and we will blame
everything imaginable except socialism
and then conversely
we again i'm left to center myself when
we look at a really great high school or
a really great university
or a really great prison that is run by
the private sector we will not want to
put it in that column
of attributing it to capitalism or the
free market we don't want to give
credit to those right-wing or
conservative
ideas and ideals because we don't have a
mentality of learning truth from facts
of examining and analyzing
empirical reality to then generalize
about it we are treating the
generalizations
as something primary in the real world
as something secondary
that exists in the shadow of those
abstractions
so this is a real philosophical problem
with pragmatic implications in the real
world
i have a letter from a viewer of the
channel supporter of mine on patreon
called ivansky
i assume that's his real name he says hi
isil this video
referring to my old video this video has
confused me a little about your views
i'm not sure of what the parameters of
this identity free politics
problem-solving approach
are so he was interpreting my video as
if my point was to say look
don't think of yourself as a socialist
don't think of yourself
as a conservative right don't let these
generalizations or abstractions define
your identity and define the way you
think about
politics instead have a pragmatic
problem-solving approach
and that's that's not a gross
misinterpretation of my earlier video
but he's slightly off the mark in an
important sense right
so he then asks so it's a good question
it's a totally good question
okay what does this mean in practice
moving forward right so so so what are
you saying are you saying
like that quote does it mean
that you're indifferent if america
becomes more socialist whatever that
term means
so long as it adequately satisfies the
challenges of the country and remains
capitalist where it matters question
mark
or say china remains communist i guess
china is interesting as it has done well
in some ways being a communist country
that functions very much like a
capitalist country albeit under
autocratic government
just pause if you look at
how universities are run and if you look
at how prisons are run
you might find communist china is no
different from
canada denmark the united states england
that actually when you look at what the
government does in practice
it is neither more nor less democratic
than the institutions in our own society
which by the way
i do not regard as a good thing i regard
it as a sign of the extent to which our
so-called democratic countries
are in a meaningful sense not democratic
at all that they are bureaucratic and
aristocratic to a greater extent than we
want to
admit to ourselves okay continuing quote
do you mean that in capitalistic
societies we should
simply be open to using socialist
approaches where it is appropriate or
efficient
question mark okay so my point is deeper
than that
right it's more fundamental and it's
more simple okay
we should be open using social
approaches where it's appropriate he
says when is it appropriate
we don't know all right we live
our lives in this way where we treat the
generalization and the abstraction as
something first and foremost and what is
it we're generalizing about
we are generalizing about the behavior
the conduct the intelligence of about
five people any
given prison the whole institution the
conduct of all the employees
who gets hired who gets fired the the
standard of self-discipline
the way the prison is run it probably
reflects about five people at the top
there are probably five people who are
in a management role
and they shape the way day-to-day
activities at the prison are they shape
the attitude and conduct of their
employees you know
it's not even necessarily that they are
corrupt themselves but if they are
tolerating corrupt employees right their
attitudes their managerial focus
then that results in corruption
throughout the whole institution
if they have a really upbeat positive
attitude that hey we're not here to
punish people we're here to educate
people and help them re-enter the
workforce
that attitude is going to shape everyone
else uh working in that prison
and of course it's partly who gets hired
and who gets fired and how they get
trained and what their instructions are
right you could have five people
with a really great attitude in
management positions at a prison
that happens to be owned by the
government and run on a nonprofit basis
you have people
and they might get paid really poorly
they might get paid less than minimum
wage but they
feel for whatever combination of reasons
this is the meaning of life for them
this is something really important
they're going to do the best job they
possibly can
you have a great prison that's being run
that way and some idiot
on youtube can sit back and generalize
and say
see this proves that the system works
this proves that a non-profit socialist
model is the best way to run a prison
and then there's some other prison in
the private sector
like the one i mentioned in south africa
that has this documentary about it
why is that prison so great okay it's
not because of the profit motive it's
not because of the stock market
it's not because of capitalism it's not
like oh well it's because the five
people at the top are paid a higher
salary which they probably are
being private sector you know the people
lower down in the prison that maybe paid
a lower salary by the way
private sector being what it is it's not
going to be something simple like the
salary or the stock market or capitalism
versus socialism
you happen to have five people working
together
to make this a success to make this the
best prison it could possibly [ __ ] be
right you had people who were passionate
and visionary and inspired
and you did a great job running or
reorganizing or renovating this prison
or all of the above people who really
cared right
why is one restaurant good and another
restaurant bad
right you can try to generalize about it
but these generalizations
can be fundamentally counterproductive
and misleading
so then we have people again no offense
to my audience but by and large
you know the people i meet and deal with
in politics by and large all of us
assembled here
to watch this youtube video we go
through life treating the abstractions
treating the generalities the
generalizations
i should say treating the
generalizations as the primary fact
guiding our decisions as what it is we
know right that the choice we make
is between socialism and capitalism is
between for-profit and non-profit
and we have this profound reluctance to
deal with the muddy contradictory
reality
of what it is that made one institution
work and another fail
who today among us is studying
what makes some university successful
and
others a failure and we have no culture
of secrecy here in the west right it's
not that it's concealed from us
nobody cares we all treat this as a
divine
mystery right oh well some some
universities are really good
and some are oh oh yeah well it's just
ridiculous
and it's the most important thing in all
of our lives we recognize that
whether you have a successful career or
not has everything to do with what
university you go to and whether or not
you go to university then once you get
to that university whether you drop out
or whether you complete the program
and then whether or not you're actually
prepared to begin a career after that
whether or not you have a chance
whether or not you have a shot at
survival let's not
understate the case depends on you
having
educational institutions in your life
that are worth a damn
and nobody seems to care about examining
why
so many of them socialist or private
sector
produce diplomas that are not worth the
paper it's printed on
and we're all bankrupting ourselves
we're all going into debt taking out
student loans and our parents
spending their money to provide us with
an education where there is no
educational opportunity where we learn
nothing and we become nothing
and we're set up for failure got in
touch with an old friend
old acquaintance loosely speaking finish
his degree at the same
university i was at and he's now bagging
groceries at the same grocery store
where he had a job
while he was in high school enjoy your
career
what did your university degree in asian
studies prepare you for i've talked
about this stuff
you know again and again all of these
things matter i mean
whether it's prisons or or the education
system
right but our own attitude
towards government is actively
precluding the possibility of learning
from experience
where instead we try to rule we try to
make these decisions in terms of
generalities okay i'll just finish
reading the letter
so he says should we be open to using
socialist approach approaches where it
is appropriate
or where it is efficient again i'm
saying we don't know
what is the best way to set up a telecom
company
to set up a cell phone service in a
third world country what is the best way
to set up uh electrical generation
uh the generation of electricity every
country around the world is a mix of
government
and private for-profit if most people
never look into this most people never
question where is the electricity coming
out of my light bulb
really come from how is it made it's a
complex self-contradictory balancing act
of private for profit and nonprofit
socialist
elements and what works and what doesn't
cannot be easily
generalized about okay question uh
that we should be open to aspects of
other ideologies question mark
how does this relate to your own views
on bigger economies like the us uk
uh australia china etc okay
the most profound problem we have in
politics today
is that we don't choose solutions
to problems and we don't even choose the
person
who's going to attempt the solution we
merely choose the kind of process
whereby that decision is made and we
call it
a democracy
what we have today is a system of
government like arranged marriage
where you don't get to choose who you
marry you don't get jews who you have
sex with
or you fall in love with but you have a
choice of several different systems
of someone else making that choice on
your behalf
we've yet to hit the breaking point of
realizing
it doesn't matter whether you have a
hindu family
arranged marriage where you know your
grandparents and aunts and uncles
conspire to find you a husband or wife
and set you up or if you have more of a
muslim
system of arranged marriage it doesn't
matter if you have
a 21st century website based arranged
marriage
we get to the point of realizing no
matter what system
of representation i choose
someone else representing me someone
else making this decision on my behalf
is never going to work i have to choose
who i'm going to marry for myself
we have a system of so-called
representative
democracy where other people make
decisions
on your behalf all you get to choose
is the system of representation and then
you choose
in the same way it would be like
choosing what grandmother is going to
choose
your wife or your husband right well i
don't get to choose my wife or husband
but i get to i get to choose my
representative within my family
for who's gonna make that decision and
then i and then i trust
their decision on what basis do we
choose these so-called
representatives we choose them on the
basis of generalizations
we choose them on the basis of
abstractions we elect bernie sanders
who calls himself a [ __ ] socialist
whatever that means
and we'll get to sit here and debate
what it means or we choose joe biden
who calls himself a capitalist and
represents 95 of the same public
policies
right we get to sit around and debate
what that means we get to choose an
abstraction we get to choose a
generalization without even knowing what
it is we're generalizing about
and then we sit back and watch what
happens
to the prison system to the university
system we never make the choice
we never get to control what happens in
our universities
in our prisons because we don't have
direct democracy
we have a system of democracy every bit
as phony
as an arranged marriage